---
solver: "Ileumassamuel"
date: "2021-08-30"
exerciseNumber: "2-2"

edition: "4"
author: "Michael Spivak"
textbook: "Calculus"
---

(i) A natural approach to exercises that require finding a formula for a
partial sum, is to evaluate it for certain values. Then, from these
values, it might be possible to establish a conjecture and, from
there, prove the conjecture.

This is exactly what will be done for this exercise. We start by
evaluating the partial sum for certain values of $n$.

::: center
**n**   **Partial sum**
------- -----------------
1            1
2            4
3            9
:::

With only three evaluations, we should be able to deduce the
conjecture that our partial sum is equal to $n^{2}$. That is,

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{i = 1}^{n} (2i - 1) = n^{2}
\end{aligned}
$$


Now, to prove this conjecture, we can either use induction or a
direct proof. In this solutions manual, a direct proof will always
be favored over a proof by induction with the reason being that, as
opposed to proofs by induction, a direct proof shows the way to
obtain the formula.

Thus, how are we to obtain this formula with some simple algebraic
manipulations? First, it definitely is a good idea to rewrite the
sum to further observe it. 
$$
\begin{aligned}
1 + 3 + 5 + \dots + (2n -1) &= 1 + 3 + \dots + (2(n - 1) - 1) + (2n - 1) \\
&= 1 + 3 + \dots + (2n - 3) + (2n - 1)
\end{aligned}
$$


We realize that if we sum a number from the $i^{th}$ position with
the $i^{th}$ number from the last, we obtain the term $2n$. For
instance, the sum of the first and last term is: 
$$
\begin{aligned}
1 + (2n - 1) = 1 - 1 + 2n = 2n
\end{aligned}
$$


Thus, all we need to do now, is handle the case when $n$ is odd and
the other where $n$ is even. If $n$ is even, then it is quite
simple: 
$$
\begin{aligned}
1 + 3 + \dots + (2n - 3) + (2n - 1) &= 1 + (2n - 1) + 3 + (2n - 3) + \dots \\
&= \underbrace{2n + 2n + \dots}_{n/2} \\
&= 2n(n/2) \\
&= n^{2}
\end{aligned}
$$


Now, if $n$ is odd, we have a term \"in the middle\" that does not
have a term to sum up with. However, it is compensated by the fact
that there are not $n/2$ $2n$ terms but $\frac{n - 1}{2}$ of them.
Furthermore, we know the middle term's index: $\frac{n + 1}{2}$.
Thus, putting all the information together, we obtain,

$$
\begin{aligned}
1 + & 3 + \dots + \underbrace{(2(\frac{n + 1}{2}) - 1)}_{\text{middle term}} + \dots + (2n - 3) + (2n - 1) \\
&= (1 + (2n - 1)) + (3 + (2n - 3)) + \dots + (n + 1 - 1) \\
&= \underbrace{2n + 2n + \dots}_{\frac{n - 1}{2}} + n \\
&= 2n (\frac{n - 1}{2}) + n \\
&= n^{2} - n + n \\
&= n^{2}
\end{aligned}
$$


Just like that, we have found and proven that the formula for the
partial sum
$\sum_{i = 1}^{n} (2i - 1) = 1 + 3 + 5 + \dots + (2n -1)$ is
$n^{2}$.

**NB.** We have implicitly assumed that the natural numbers
$\mathbb{N}$ are comprised of even and odd positive numbers.

(ii) When no answer seems in sight, it is best to simply scribble and
hope for an opening.

Nonetheless, while solving exercises from *Chapter 1*, one might
notice that those preceding one were usually used to help solve it.
With that in mind, **a small hint for this exercise would be to
look at the formula of exercise 1.1**. 
$$
\begin{aligned}
1^{2} + \dots + n^{2} = \frac{n(n+1)(2n+1)}{6}           
\end{aligned}
$$


Since we know the formula for the partial sum of squared natural
numbers, would it not be convenient to subtract from it the sum of
squared even numbers leading up to an odd number? You might say:
But we would have to find the formula for the sum of squared even
numbers! That would make two formulas to find! 'Deed that does make
it two formulas to find. Let's get to work! 
$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{i = 1}^{n} (2i - 1)^{2} &= 1^{2} + 3^{2} + \dots + (2n -1)^{2} \\
&= 1^{2} + 2^{2} + \dots + {(2n - 2)}^{2} + {(2n - 1)}^{2} \\
& \qquad - (2^{2} + 4^{2} + \dots + {(2n - 4)}^{2} + {(2n - 2)}^{2}) \\
&= \frac{(2n - 1)(2n - 1 + 1)(2 (2n - 1) + 1)}{6} \\
& \qquad - ({(2 \cdot 1)}^{2} + {(2 \cdot 2)}^{2} + \dots + {(2 \cdot (n - 2) )}^{2} + {(2 \cdot (n - 1))}^{2} ) \\
&= \frac{(2n - 1)(2n)(4n - 2 + 1)}{6} \\
& \qquad - 2^{2} ({1}^{2} + {2}^{2} + \dots + {(n - 2)}^{2} + {(n - 1)}^{2} ) \\
&= \frac{n(2n - 1)(4n - 1)}{3} - 4 \frac{(n - 1) (n - 1 + 1) (2(n - 1) + 1)}{6} \\
&= \frac{n(2n - 1)(4n - 1) - 2n (n - 1) (2n - 1)}{3} \\
&= \frac{n(2n - 1) ((4n - 1) - 2 (n - 1) )}{3} \\
&= \frac{n(2n - 1) (4n - 1 - 2n + 2 )}{3} \\
&= \frac{n(2n - 1) (2n + 1)}{3} \\
&= \frac{n (4n^{2} - 1)}{3}
\end{aligned}
$$
