---
solver: "Ileumassamuel"
date: "2021-08-30"
exerciseNumber: "2-4-6"

edition: "2"
author: "Stephen Abbott"
textbook: "Understanding Analysis"
---

(a) To prove that the inequality holds under the given assumptions, let
us first prove another one.

That is, we first prove that

$$
\forall a,b \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0 }, \quad a \leq b \implies a^2
\leq b^2.
$$


Since the product of positive numbers is positive, we then have that

$$
\begin{aligned}
\forall a, b \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}, \quad a \leq b
&\implies b - a \geq 0 \\
&\implies (b - a)(b + a) \geq 0 \\
&\implies b^2 - a^2 \geq 0 \\
&\implies a^2 \leq b^2.
\end{aligned}
$$


Now, coming back to the inequality of the exercise, we have to prove
that 
$$
\begin{aligned}
\forall x,y \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}, \quad \sqrt{xy} \leq
\frac{(x + y)}{2}.
\end{aligned}
$$


Applying our freshly proved inequality, we know that

$$
\begin{aligned}
\forall x,y \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}, \quad \sqrt{xy}
\leq \frac{(x + y)}{2}
&\iff xy \leq \frac{(x + y)^2}{4} \\
&\iff xy \leq \frac{x^2}{4} + \frac{xy}{2} +
\frac{y^2}{4} \\
&\iff \frac{xy}{2} \leq \frac{x^2}{4} + \frac{y^2}{4} \\
&\iff 2xy \leq x^2 + y^2 \\
&\iff 0 \leq x^2 - 2xy + y^2 \\
&\iff 0 \leq (x - y)^2.
\end{aligned}
$$


Thus, we inequality holds when $x$ and $y$ are positive real
numbers.

(b) We first prove that both sequences are convergent. To assist us in
proving this, let us first prove that both sequences are positive.
That is, 
$$
\forall n \in \mathbb{N}, \quad x_{n}, y_{n} \geq 0.
$$


Using induction, we first prove the base case. Since

$$
0 \leq x_1 \leq y_1
$$
then 
$$
x_1, y_1 \geq 0.
$$


Moving on to the induction step, assume that both $x_{n}$ and
$y_{n}$ are positive. Then, for $x_{n}$, we have

$$
x_{n + 1} = \sqrt{x_{n} y_{n}}
=\sqrt{x_{n}} \sqrt{y_{n}} \geq 0
$$


since each argument of the square root functions are positive.

With the same assumption (both $x_{n}$ and $y_{n}$ are positive),
for $y_{n}$, we have

$$
y_{n + 1} = \frac{(x_{n} + y_{n})}{2} \geq 0
$$


since the numerator is obviously positive.

We can now come back to our original objective which was to prove
that both sequences are convergent. To apply MCT, let's prove that
$x_{n}$ is increasing and bounded above. The base case holds true
since 
$$
\begin{aligned}
x_1 \leq y_1
&\implies \sqrt{x_1} \leq \sqrt{y_1} \\
&\implies x_1 \leq \sqrt{x_1} \sqrt{y_1} = x_2.
\end{aligned}
$$


Next, let's assume that $x_{n + 1} \geq x_{n}$. Then,

$$
\begin{aligned}
x_{n + 2} \geq x_{n + 1}
&\iff \sqrt{x_{n + 1} y_{n + 1}} \geq x_{n + 1} \\
&\iff x_{n + 1}y_{n + 1} \geq x_{n + 1}^2 \\
&\iff y_{n + 1} \geq x_{n + 1}.
\end{aligned}
$$


The last inequality is obviously true, applying the identity in (a),
since both $x_{n}$ and $y_{n}$ are positive. To help us in finding
an upper bound for $x_{n}$, let's prove that prove with induction
that $y_{n}$ is decreasing. Our base case holds because

$$
\begin{aligned}
y_2 = \frac{(x_1 + y_1)}{2} \leq y_1
&\iff x_1 + y_1 \leq 2y_1 \\
&\iff x_1 \leq y_1.
\end{aligned}
$$


For our induction step, by assuming that $y_{n + 1} \leq y_{n}$, we
then have 
$$
\begin{aligned}
y_{n + 2} \leq y_{n + 1}
&\iff \frac{(x_{n + 1} + y_{n + 1})}{2} \leq y_{n + 1} \\
&\iff x_{n + 1} + y_{n + 1} \leq 2y_{n + 1} \\
&\iff x_{n + 1} \leq y_{n + 1}.
\end{aligned}
$$


Again, the last inequality is true by applying the proven identity
in (a). Since we've previously proven that all $y_{n}$ terms are
positive, we can use 0 as its lower bound. This then allows us to
apply MCT on $y_{n}$, assuring us of a limit this sequence. In
finding an upper bound for $x_{n}$, notice that (this is why it was
important to prove that $y_{n}$ is decreasing)

$$
\forall n \in \mathbb{N}, \quad x_1 \leq x_2 \leq \dots \leq x_{n - 1} \leq x_{n}
\leq y_{n} \leq y_{n - 1} \leq \dots \leq y_2 \leq y_1.
$$


Therefore, we can use $y_1$ as an upper bound for all terms in the
sequence $x_{n}$. Again, having satisfied the conditions of MCT for
$x_{n}$, we know that $x_{n}$ converges as well. Now, to prove that
both sequences converge to the same limit, notice that

$$
\begin{aligned}
\lim_{n \to \infty} y_{n} = \lim_{n \to \infty} \frac{x_{n}
+ y_{n}}{2}
&\implies \lim_{n \to \infty} y_{n} = \frac{\lim_{n \to
\infty} x_{n} + \lim_{n \to \infty} y_{n} }{2} \\
&\implies 2 \lim_{n \to \infty} y_{n} = \lim_{n \to
\infty} x_{n} + \lim_{n \to \infty} y_{n} \\
&\implies \lim_{n \to \infty} y_{n} = \lim_{n \to
\infty} x_{n}.
\end{aligned}
$$
