---
solver: "Ileumassamuel"
date: "2021-08-30"
exerciseNumber: "2-4-3"

edition: "2"
author: "Stephen Abbott"
textbook: "Understanding Analysis"
---

(a) By rewriting the sequence as a recursive one,

$$
y_{n} = (\sqrt{2}, \; \sqrt{2 + \sqrt{2}},\; \sqrt{2 + \sqrt{2 +
\sqrt{2}}}, \; \dots)
$$
is equivalent to

$$
y_{n + 1} = \sqrt{2 + y_{n}}
$$
with $y_1 = \sqrt{2}$. This makes
it easier for us to prove the conditions of MCT, which we attempt,
to demonstrate that the sequence converges.

Since the square root function is increasing, we know that the
sequence also is increasing (proof that the square root function is
increasing in the appendix). Next, we prove that the sequence is
bounded above. Let us try to use the upper bound 2, solely because 2
is one of the recurring arguments of the sequence. The base case is
obviously true since 
$$
y_{1} = \sqrt{2} < 2.
$$


For the induction step, assume that $y_{n} < 2$. Since the sequence
is increasing and the lower bound is $y_1 = \sqrt{2}$, all terms in
the sequence are positive. Then, 
$$
\begin{aligned}
y_{n + 1} = \sqrt{2 + y_{n}} < 2
&\iff 2 + y_{n} < 4 \\
&\iff y_{n} < 2.
\end{aligned}
$$


Now knowing that the limit exists, we apply the strategy shown in
the previous exercise to find it. By labeling $\lim_{n \to
\infty} y_{n}$ as $L$, we have 
$$
\begin{aligned}
\lim_{n \to \infty} y_{n} = \lim_{n \to \infty} \sqrt{2
+ y_{n}}
&\implies L = \sqrt{2 + L} \\
&\implies L^2 - L - 2 = 0 \\
&\implies (L + 1)(L - 2) = 0 \\
&\implies x_1 = -1, \quad x_2 = 2.
\end{aligned}
$$


Since the sequence is always positive, the limit is $x_2 = 2$.

(b) As for (a), we rewrite the sequence as a recursive one, rendering

$$
y_{n} = (\sqrt{2}, \; \sqrt{2 \sqrt{2}}, \; \sqrt{2 \sqrt{2
\sqrt{2}}}, \; \dots)
$$
as

$$
y_{n + 1} = \sqrt{2 y_{n}}
$$
with $y_1 = 2$. Again, we first prove
that the sequence converges before applying the now common strategy
to find the limit of the sequence. Since this exercise has a close
resemblance to (a), I leave it as an exercise. The limit is 2, as in
(a).
